	Simple spamikaze data exchange design
	May 14, 2004

	Rik van Riel
	riel@surriel.com



	Overview

Every spamikaze installation receives a limited amount of spam
to its spamtraps.  This is a good thing since it limits the amount
of resources (ab)used, but it increases the possibility of a
spamikaze installation not learning of an ongoing spam run until
that spam run hits its own spamtraps.  At that time the human
users, who the spamikaze is supposed to shield, may have already
received the spam in question.

To improve the chances of spamikaze blocking spam sent to the
users, it would be useful if there was a low overhead way for
spamikaze installations to learn of spamtrap events at other
spamikaze setups. This way mail from spam sources could be
blocked before its own spam traps (and users) are spammed.

This proposal contains ideas on how to implement such a
mechanism, addressing these areas:
- Data Exchange Model
- High Level Protocol
- Protocol Details and Extensibility
- Trust Model
- Database and Security Considerations

If you have any comments on this proposal, please email the
spamikaze mailing list, <spamikaze@kernelnewbies.org>.


	Data Exchange Model

The basic model is client/server, with the twist that any
participant can be both client and server, though this is in
no way necessary.  There will be two simple programs, one for
the client (getting information from another spamikaze system)
and one for the server (giving information to clients).

The server will listen on a predetermined network port.  The client
will connect to the server.  For simplicity (and security concerns)
the first implementation will probably follow a one process per
connection model, possibly using (x)inetd for access control.


	High Level Protocol

There are basically three distinct phases of the data exchange:
initial handshake, synchronisation and live feed.

Initial handshake:  during this phase the server informs the
client of a number of its identity, giving details like the
name of the spamikaze list, the base URL for listing data,
the email of the list maintainer, etc...

Synchronisation:  the client asks the server for all spamtrap
events that happened on the server since a certain timestamp,
usually the timestamp of the last spamtrap event received from
this particular server.  The server then proceeds to send the
requested information to the client, potentially limiting the
number of events sent to a certain number to prevent resource
waste.

Live feed:  after the synchronisation is done, the server will
automatically send new spamtrap events to the client as they
happen.  This could either be a live feed from the spamtrap
software, or a periodic polling of the database.  The client
does not need to send any requests, since the server is still
"sending all spamtrap events since a certain timestamp", like
the client requested in the synchronisation phase.

Using this model we can synchronise both live events and the
events that happened during the time where client and server
were not connected to each other, using the same connection
and protocol.


	Protocol Details and Extensibility

In order to ease debuggability, extensibility, ease of programming
and - through the former - security, spamikaze will use an RFC 822
style plain text format for serving data to the client.

RFC 822 style messages have the advantages of being easy to parse
and of the client being able to ignore messages of unknown types,
or message content of an unknown type.  This means that the protocol
can be extended without the need for every spamikaze installation
to upgrade to the new protocol simultaneously.

The following are two examples of what a version 1 spamikaze
message could look like, with all messages separated by an
empty line:

Type: Server-ID
Spamikaze-name: PSBL
Base-URL: "http://psbl.surriel.com/listing?ip=@IP@"

Type: spamtrap
IP: 1.2.3.4
Time: 1084588813

In this case, the message type can easily be identified by the
"Type:" header; the rest of the message can be parsed by a
routine that knows how to deal with this type of message, parsing
the headers it knows about and ignoring the rest.  If the minimum
data needed to process an event isn't present, the client can
either ignore the message or trigger an error handling event like
reinitialising the connection to the server.


	Trust Model

Trust considerations are different for the client and the server
side.  A server could decide to let anybody have information on
which IP addresses are hitting its spamtraps, in effect giving
the whole world read-only access to its database.  The main
reasons for access control on the server side would be resource
use and the possibility that a client could learn the identity
of the server's spamtraps.

A client, on the other hand, would only want to import data into
its own spamikaze database from sources it trusts.  After all,
the data being imported has influence on which email will be
blocked.

In this model it is important that each server only exports the
data from its own spamtraps.  It is easy for a client to trust
the spamtraps of one server, but a much bigger leap of faith to
trust the data of whoever it is the server pulls data from.
Additionally, passing through the data received from others
creates the possibility of spamikaze installations passing the
same messages around in an infinite loop, quickly exhausting
resources everywhere.


	Database and Security Considerations

The server side of the spamikaze network communications software
only needs SELECT rights, to inform the client of spamtrap events.
Assuming other standard precautions are followed, the potential
for security problems with the server side should be minimal.

Even though the client should only connect to trusted servers,
the security risk on this side is bigger.  This is mostly due
to the fact that the client software needs to have the ability
to INSERT records with spamtrap event data into the database.

Security risk and recoverability can be limited by not allowing
the client to UPDATE records in the spamtrap events table, as
well as by clearly identifying the source of every spamtrap
event.  When a client decides to no longer trust a particular
server, it will be easy to purge the database of all spamtrap
events from that particular server.

The database table with spamtrap events would contain the fields
ID, IP address, timestamp and spamikaze_id, the last being an ID
denoting from which server the data was obtained.  There would be
a smaller table containing information about the spamikaze lists
from which information is being obtained (the servers).



